Towards the end of the 13th century,
around the year 1293, the Venetian
explorer and adventurer Marco Polo was
traveling through Southeast Asia in the
region of what is today Myanmar or Burma.
Marco Polo had spent much of the last 20
years traveling around the Asian
continent in a remarkable series of
journeys along the ancient route known
as the Silk Road, and recently he had
come into the employment of the Mongol
emperor of China, a man named Kublai Khan.
Impressed by this foreign visitor, the
emperor had appointed Marco Polo an
ambassador, and he was now traveling
through the forested mountains of
southwestern China that now stand on the
border of Myanmar.
He passed through these jungle hills,
thick with bamboo forests and shaded
groves, and then down into a wide river
valley full of wild animals.
Leaving the province of Kardandan,
you enter a vast descent which you
travel without variation for two days
and a half, in the course of which no
habitations are to be found. You then
reach a spacious plain. Beyond this, in a
southerly direction, towards the confines
of India, lies the city of Mien.
The journey occupies 15 days through a
country much depopulated and forests
abounding with elephants, rhinoceroses,
and other wild beasts,
where there is not the appearance of any
habitation.
In this country were found many
elephants, large and handsome wild oxen,
with stags, fallow deer, and other animals
in great abundance.
But finally, after more than two weeks,
Marco Polo came across a large city, and
it was a city that despite all he'd seen
on his travels still stood out to him
for its size and magnificence, a city
where more than 4,000 golden temples
sent their spires lancing up into the
afternoon air over the flat pan of the
river valley.
After the journey of 15 days that has
been mentioned, you reach the city of
Mien, which is large, magnificent, and the
capital of the kingdom.
The inhabitants are idolaters and have a
language peculiar to themselves.
It is related that there formally
reigned in this country a rich and
powerful monarch.
The city that Marco Polo called Mien
had fallen on hard times. Everywhere,
homes were abandoned and temples had
fallen into disuse and disrepair. There
would have been the signs of war, hungry
and displaced people on the streets, but
over these sorry sights, the golden
shrines of the city towered and attested
to its former magnificence. Of all of
these, two enormous temples stood out in
particular.
When his death was drawing near, the king
gave orders for erecting on the place of
his internment, at the head and foot of
the sepulcher, two pyramidal towers
entirely of marble, ten paces in height,
of a proportionate bulk, and each
terminating with a ball.
One of these pyramids was covered with a
plate of gold an inch in thickness so
that nothing besides the gold was
visible, and the other with a plate of
silver of the same thickness.
Around the balls were suspended small
bells of gold and of silver, which
sounded when put in motion by the wind.
The whole formed a splendid object.
Years later he would return to Italy and
fall on the wrong side of a war between
the city states of Genoa and Venice, and
he would be thrown in prison by the
Genoese.
He would share his jail cell with a
writer named Rustichello da Pisa, who was
greatly impressed with Polo's tales of
his travels.
While waiting in prison for the war to
end, the pair of them worked to clarify
Polo's memories and write them down in
vivid detail with what many scholars
consider to be a surprisingly high
degree of accuracy and authenticity.
Together with the writer Rustichello,
Marco Polo would become the first
outsider to write a description of a
city at the heart of an empire that
today we know by the name Bagan.
For centuries it had united the lands of
Myanmar and presided over a boom in art
and architecture, constructing one of the
most striking collections of religious
buildings that the world has ever seen.
The empire of Bagan had flourished and
survived, and then in a flash, its golden
age had ended, its people had left, and
its grand temples had fallen slowly into
ruin.
My name's Paul Cooper, and you're
listening to The Fall of Civilizations
Podcast.
Each episode, I look at a civilization
of the past that rose to glory and then
collapsed into the ashes of history.
I want to ask, what did they have in
common, what led to their fall, and what
did it feel like to be a person alive at
the time who witnessed the end of their
world?
In this episode, I want to tell one of
the most colorful stories of
civilizational survival, the story of the
Bagan Empire of medieval Myanmar.
I want to show how this kingdom rose up
in the Irrawaddy river valley of central
Myanmar, and built one of the most
remarkable series of monuments to have
survived anywhere in the world. I want to
show what life was like for the people
who lived there, and what happened to
cause its sudden and complete collapse.
The modern country of Myanmar is today
the largest nation by continuous landmass
in Southeast Asia. It's the size of
Texas and nearly three times larger than
the United Kingdom.
Myanmar borders India in the west and
China in the east, and its lands stretch
between the mountain ranges the Arakan,
the Pegu, the Chin, and the Shan Yoma.
Between the bony peaks of these mountain
ranges that run like a series of spines
north to south down the whole country,
flow the rivers Chindwin, Shweli, N’mai,
and Mali.
Many of these rivers begin in the
Himalayan glaciers of upper Burma, and
all of them flow down through the gorges
of the high mountains and join the
largest watercourse of all in a wide and
sinuous flow.
This is the great river Irrawaddy.
The name of the Irrawaddy River derives
from the Sanskrit name Airavati, a
legendary white elephant with four tusks
and the seven trunks, who in Hindu
mythology is the trusted mount of the
god Indra, and it's not hard to see why
the river deserves this grand and
mythical name.
The Irrawaddy River winds for more than
two thousand kilometers across the Dry
Zone of Burma, through palm forests and
scrublands, and around sandy islands.
The river is also one of Asia's widest,
and at points during the rainy season, it
can swell to nearly a kilometer across.
These floods can be so dramatic that for
millennia, the people of Burma have built
houses along the river on top of tall
bamboo stilts that allow the flood
waters to rise below them.
At the end of the river's journey, the
Irrawaddy branches out into a wide delta
of mangrove forests, marshes, and
meandering streams, where it finally
empties into the Southern Ocean.
The general center of the river's course
is an arid heartland that's known as
Myanmar's Dry Zone, since it receives a
relatively small amount of rainfall
every year.
The mountains that surround this wide
basin on three sides soak up much of the
moisture, holding back the clouds like a
great wall.
But the rain falls instead in the hills,
and this rainwater then flows down
through the great river Irrawaddy.
This means that so long as you stay
close to the river, the Dry Zone is
actually never short of water.
Since humans first arrived in Myanmar,
people have flocked to the banks of this
river to make their livelihoods, to farm
their rice, and to build their towns.
The earliest cultures we have evidence
for arrived in Myanmar around 11,000 BC,
and by about 1500 BC, people in the
region were already turning copper into
bronze, growing rice, and domesticating
chickens and pigs, and they would be
among the first people in the world to
farm these animals for food.
By around 500 BC, iron was being worked
in the region.
Since the earliest history, the rivers have
also been highways.
The people of Myanmar have always built
watercraft, often rafts made out of the
strong and light Burmese bamboo that
grows everywhere along stream banks and
in the lower hills, or more refined
barges made of teakwood.
The teak tree has adapted to contain a
large amount of natural oil, giving it an
exceptional water resistance.
The teak growing in Burma is so abundant
that it has been used to make enormous
constructions like bridges that have
lasted for nearly 200 years.
One famous bridge named U Bein
spans more than a kilometer across
Taungthaman Lake, and is made up of more than a
thousand teakwood pillars driven into
the lake bed.
The people here even build floating
island gardens that rise and fall with
the water level, and which for centuries
have turned the surface of the lake
into productive agricultural land.
If people wanted to travel south, they
could easily float their boats
downstream, but the prevailing winds also
blew south to north, meaning that it was
also possible to sail against the
current, making travel in both directions
along the river relatively easy.
The Irrawaddy River was so conceptually
important to the history of this region
that people in Burma would rarely talk
about the country in terms of north and
south, but rather used the words anya and
akye, upstream and downstream.
One traditional Burmese poet describes
the coming of summer in the landscape of
the Irrawaddy valley.
As the hot season revolts against the
cold in the pattern of contrasts, the sky
becomes cloudy and winds are hot again.
It is summer.  The leaves on trees turn yellow
to fall to show new leaves.
Stems twist or break, yet sprouts on tama
trees are now soft greens like parrot
eggs, while in summer trees thirst in
foothills, tazin flowers are climbing
tabye trees, effusing fragrance, mixing
with the wafting air.  At sunset, crow
pheasants are cooing, and from afar come
the cuckoo's notes. Now and again, thunder
is beating through Heaven's expanses
like lambara anddeindi drums, and I, oh,
I think of the pouring of water on the
Bodhi tree and of the absent companion
in the Golden Palace of Victory,
and I am mournful.
Like many languages in Southeast Asia,
the Burmese language has different
levels of register depending on how
polite or formal you need to be, and the
land itself has different names
depending on the register you're using.
In everyday speech, people most commonly
use the name Bama to describe the
country and its people, while the grander
and more poetic name is Myanmar.
Both of these names have been used
alongside each other for centuries.
When the country became a British colony,
the colonial government used the
informal name Burma, which is the name
that British people first heard being
used by common sailors and traders.
But in 1989, the military dictatorship
that then ruled the country changed the
name officially to the grander name of
Myanmar.
Because of this complicated history, in
Myanmar today, the question of the
country's name has deep-rooted
controversies, but in this episode I will
follow the example of the majority of
Burmese people and use both names
interchangeably depending on context.
So, it's on this geographical stage
that the story of the Bagan Empire would
play out, in the Dry Zone of the country,
surrounded on all sides by mountains and
watered by the great river highway, the
Irrawaddy.
For much of this region's history,
whoever controlled the Dry Zone
controlled the rest of the country, and
so, it was also a land soaked in the
blood of conflict.
There were two major sources for events
in Myanmar during the medieval period.
The first of these are the inscriptions
left carved in stone at many temples and
other buildings, which kings left in
order to celebrate their deeds, and the
second of these sources is the so-called
Chronicles of Burma.
These chronicles are a diverse
collection of documents written over
many centuries by monks and scholars on
different materials. Some are written on
paper made of the Siamese rough bush
tree or paper mulberry, glued into very
long sheets and folded in a concertina
fashion, while others are written on palm
leaf or even carved into stone tablets.
The first chronicle that has survived
was written in the 13th century during
the Bagan era.
The so-called Maha Yazawin, or Great
Chronicle, was completed several
centuries later in the year 1724, and it
was followed nearly a century later by
the Yazawin Thit, or New Chronicle, which
attempted to square some of the
contradictions between the chronicles
and the stone inscriptions, as its author
writes in his introduction.
There are chronicles written by ancient
scholars, but in those chronicles written
by ancient scholars, there are some
matters which do not accord with the
inscriptions.
Like many such historical documents,
these chronicles were paid for by kings
and produced under their supervision, and
they are instruments of official
propaganda.  They are also full of
exaggeration, poetic license, and
mythology, especially in the earlier
reaches of Burmese history. They include
truly ludicrous exaggerations about the
size of armies, often describing battles
involving tens of millions of soldiers,
and they frequently include the colorful
appearances of ogres, ghosts, ghouls,
demons, and magicians, along with
countless figures from Burmese mythology.
But in all their fantastical
presentation, these chronicles can
combine with official inscriptions to
preserve relatively accurate dates and
events, and they also preserve the
folklore and traditional memory of the
people. In the year 1829, the king Bagyidaw
of Burma appointed a committee of
scholars to write a chronicle of the
Burmese kings that would act as the
final complete edition.
He gathered them in the glittering front
wing of his residence, known as the Glass
Palace, and instructed them to get to
work. The king of the law, seeing the many
discrepancies and repetitions in the
former chronicles, gave thought to the
matter. Being convinced that a chronicle
of kings should be the standard and not
a thing of conflicting and false
statements, he assembled his ministers
and ecclesiastical teachers in the front
chamber of the palace, which was
variegated with diverse gems and a fit
place for the most exalted personages,
and caused the chronicle to be purified
by comparing it with other chronicles
and a number of inscriptions each with
the other, and adopting the truth in the
light of reason and the traditional
books.
This document, full of tangents and
footnotes, would become known as the
Glass Palace Chronicle. Despite its
complicated nature, it's a remarkable
text that gives us a real glimpse of how
the people of ancient Bagan felt and
thought about their lives and the world
around them, as well as the birth of
their empire.
The origins of the people who first
spoke the Burmese language are wreathed
in mystery. The Burmese chronicles claim
a line of kings going back to the second
century, but modern scholars and
archaeologists consider this to be
extremely unlikely. One more plausible
account traces the history of these
people back to the early 9th century and
the powerful kingdom named Nanchao.
The power of Nanchao ruled over the area
across the mountains to the east, in what
is today the lofty province of Yunnan in
Western China.
For years, the kings of Nanchao had set
their sights on the rich river valley of
the Irrawaddy.
The year was 832.
Around the world at this time, the
Byzantine Empire, the last remaining part
of what had been the Roman Empire, was
fighting for its life against
increasingly confident Arab empires
inspired by the young religion of Islam.
In the Mayan lowlands of southern Mexico,
the last king of the soaring city of
Copan, a man named Ukit Took, was
commissioning a stone monument that
would never be finished because his
entire society was collapsing under the
pressures of drought and warfare, and the
population was fleeing the city.
In what is today France, King Pepin I
of Aquitaine and his brother Louis
the German revolted against their father,
the Frankish Emperor Louis the Pious, the
son of Charlemagne,
and in the mountains of southern China,
the armies of Nanchao marched out to
conquer the lands of Burma.
At that time, the society occupying the
Dry Zone around the Irrawaddy was a people
who are remembered as the Pyu.
Exactly who the Pyu were and what they
called themselves, we have little idea. It
seems they spoke a language of the
Sino-Tibetan family and lived in a
loosely-connected group of five
city states in the valley of the Irrawaddy.
Their culture was heavily influenced by
trade with India. In the preceding
centuries, they had imported Buddhism as
well as other Indian cultural concepts,
architectural styles, and political
structures, and they had based their
writing system on the Indian Brahmi
script.
One 9th century Chinese text known as
the Manchu or the Book of Southern
Barbarians, records the Chinese
impressions of this land and the Pyu
people who lived there.
To the south of Yongchang City, one first
passes beyond the lands of the Tang
Empire to phoenix-blue jungles, then to
vast skies, then to clearings. There lie
huge rivers and settlements. They live in
multi-storied houses, without city walls,
sometimes painting their teeth, always
dressing in untreated cloth with rattan
warn about their waist, red silk cloth
wrapped about their top knot, and other
hair hanging behind in a decorative
fashion.
Peacocks nest in nearby trees, and
elephants are as large as water buffalo.
The locals customarily raise elephants
to till the fields and burn their dung
as fuel.
The armies of Nanchao marched through the
narrow mountain passes thickly carpeted
with forest, and swept through the
Burmese lowlands on a series of
devastating raids, taking both plunder
and slaves.
In the 10th year of the Zhenyuan era,
Nanchao sought out and attacked them. On
the 21st day of the 12th month of the
third year of the Sheeantong era, at the
cliffs of the Suli River, some 2,000 to
3,000 troops massed.
According to ancient sources, the Nanchao
deported many thousands of the Pyu
people who lived and farmed in this
fertile valley and sent them away into
slavery.
Among the troops of Nanchao were a group
of cavalry warriors from a people known
as the Mien, a small ethnic tribe from
the high plateaus who spoke an ancestor
of what would become the Burmese
language.
But these troops had dreams of going
their own way, and once they had tasted
freedom in the valley of the Irrawaddy,
they had no desire to return to Nanchao.
Used to life in the rocky mountain
plateaus of the north, the arid plains of
Burma were a familiar ecology to them,
and with the native population there
devastated by the Nanchao raids, their
lands were there for the taking.
The Mien broke away from the kingdom of
Nanchao and decided to settle in this
new land, and ultimately they would found
a kingdom there.
Other historians contest that the
Burmese speakers already existed in the
valley and that they were part of the
Pi’ao people and had nothing to do with
the Nanchao raids.
But as with everything in these early
stages of the chronicles, we’re left with
a hazy fog of contradictions and
uncertainties, and the answer actually
may have been a mix of both.
On the other side of the world at the
same time, seagoing Norsemen from
Scandinavia were arriving in great
numbers on the shores of Eastern England,
sometimes as raiders, sometimes as
settlers, and sometimes as refugees, and
over the next century, they would come to
topple the Saxon kingdoms that ruled
there, and as they did so, they would plant
a distinctly Norse character on the
people of England and the English
language that emerged from them.
I think it's possible that the Burmese
people then settling in the Irrawaddy
valley may have arrived in similarly
complex circumstances and formed a
similar hybrid culture with the people
who lived there.
With much of this matter concealed in
the fog of history, what we can say with
some certainty is that around the year
849, just 17 years after the date given
to the Nanchao raids, the Mien built a
walled fortress at a place on the eastern
bank of the Irrawaddy River,
a place that would later come to be
known as Bagan.
The chosen location for the city of
Bagan owed much to the geography of the
land around it. It seems to have been
built on the ruins of a previous
settlement belonging to the Pyu people,
and stood on a sizable bend in the
meandering course of the Irrawaddy River.
The settlement had easy access to water
and was surrounded by countryside that
would be the most fertile and productive
of all Myanmar for the next 500 years.
Part of the reason for this was the
region's violent geological history.
Around 50 kilometers to the southeast of
Bagan was a great dormant volcano named
Mount Popa. This volcanic cone, covered in
thick forest and shaded bamboo groves, is
a sacred site that for centuries has
been the focal point of worship for the
people of Burma. Southwest of Mount Popa
is Taung Kalat or Pedestal Hill, a
striking sheer-sided volcanic plug which
rises more than 650 meters above sea-
-level, and where a Buddhist monastery now
sits towering over the forested
landscape below.
Mount Popa has long been believed to be
the home of powerful spirits that the
Burmese call Nats, and the worship of
these spirits has always existed
alongside Buddhist religious practices
in a complex relationship.
While this soaring mountain rising out
of the flat plain has long captured the
imaginations and religious sensibilities
of the people, it was also partly to
thank for the success of their society.
The ash that volcanoes spew out during
their eruptions is rich in elements such
as iron, magnesium, and potassium, minerals
that are crucial for the healthy growth
of plants. When volcanic rock and ash
weather and leach into the soil, these
elements are released. So, combined
with the fertility of the silty soil
along the river itself and the plentiful
water supply, this meant that the soils
in this region were immensely productive,
and the people of Bagan were able to
conduct two bountiful rice harvests per
year and grow other crops like pulses,
sesamum, cucumbers, and millet.
On the spot that they'd chosen for their
new city, the Mien built a thick and high
wall out of brick,
and they built it according to the
traditions of Buddhist cosmology and
numerology.
The inner wall of Bagan was broken by
twelve gates to represent the twelve
signs of the Zodiac, with four main gates
at each of the cardinal directions; north,
south, east, and west.
The walled area of the city wasn't huge,
a little over a square kilometer in fact,
but the walls contained only the palaces
of the kings and the headquarters of his
administration. Outside this fortified
center, a sprawling city would soon grow
up around it, much of it built out of
teak and bamboo that has left little
trace in the archaeological record.
By the mid 10th century, a king was in
place in Bagan, although we don't know
the exact names and dates for these
early kings. One 9th century Arab
traveler to India and Burma, named
Sulayman Nadwi, wrote an account of the
powerful army that one king of Burma
fielded.
They said that when he marches to battle,
he is accompanied by about 50,000
elephants. He campaigns only in winter.
Indeed, his elephants cannot stand thirst,
and so they can go forth only in winter.
They say that in his army, even the
washermen amounted between 10 and
15,000.
Thanks to the ongoing study of
inscriptions, we do know the names of at
least two kings who ruled around the
turn of the first millennium; Nyaung-u Sawrahan
and Kyaung Pjy Min, both of whom were once
considered to be legendary. By the year
1004, a Chinese source from the Song
Dynasty records an ambassador arriving
from what they called the P’u-kan
kingdom, which is thought to refer to
Bagan. It seems this ambassador was
seeking recognition from Song China,
which was then considered the great
power in the region, suggesting that the
kingdom of Bagan was now confident
enough to look outwards and assert
itself to its neighbors.
But reliable sources on these early
kings are extremely thin and all mixed
up with legend.
The first king of Bagan who steps out of
the historical record in full color
would not come for another half-century.
He was long considered the founder of
the Bagan Empire, and although we now
know that it was likely in existence for
two centuries or so before his reign, he
is arguably its first great king, and
certainly the king who would lead it to
new and glorious heights.
He was a man named Anawrahta.
Anawrahta's early life was one of
upheaval and family conflict.
His father was the king, but he had been
a usurper on the throne of Bagan, having
overthrown the previous king in a
rebellion, and like most usurpers,
Anawrahta’s father lived in constant fear of
one day being overthrown himself.
Anawrahta grew up as a prince in the
palace with his two older step-brothers,
men named Kyizo and Sokkate.
These brothers were actually the sons of
the previous king, but Anawrahta's father
had adopted them and raised them as his
own, and so they grew up together.
But his older stepbrothers Kyizo and
Sokkate always treated the younger
Anawrahta as though he were an inferior,
something that must have rankled the
young prince.
It's clear that these two brothers
also dreamed of one day reclaiming some
of the glory that their adoptive father
had stolen from them.
While he was still a boy, Anawrahta's
treacherous brothers plotted a coup to
overthrow his now aging father, as the
Glass Palace Chronicle recalls.
When Kyizo and Sokkate came of age, they
built a pleasant monastery and said to
King Kunhsaw, ‘Come and call thy blessings
on the monastery,’
and the king took no heed nor scrutiny,
but hearkened to them, and Kyizo and
Sokkate seized the king and threatened him
and made him become a monk, and they
spread the rumor far and wide that the
king, in his zeal for bliss hereafter, had
become a monk.
This palace coup must have scandalized
the Royal Court, and despite the relative
commonness of coups of this kind, the
historians of Burma are clear in their
view on it. The Glass Palace Chronicle
recounts how a number of evil omens
accompanied this shocking act.
About the time of his fall, a miracle was
seen in the Pahto pagoda. The Friday star
trampled on the moon. The moon was a full
circle on the second day of waxing. The
Earth quaked seven days. The water stood
still in the river.
First, the brother named Kyizo ruled as
king, but the chronicles recall that he
was killed one day by a hunter who
mistook him for a deer.
He built a royal box in the marshes of
the Chindwin and visited the ten
villages of Bangyi, hunting deer. One day, a
hunter lay waiting for thamine at the
place where they drank water.
The king likewise came to the spot to
wait for deer, and the hunter knew not
that it was the king, but shot with the
bow and hit him that he died. He passed
at the age of 28. About the time of his
death, an ogre laughed for a full half
month and threw stones at the palace.
After this unfortunate accident, the
other treacherous brother Sokkate took
the throne, and it's perhaps not
unreasonable to wonder whether this
story of the hunter accidentally killing
the king might actually be a polite way
for the chroniclers to get around the
fact that the new king had actually had
his brother Kyizo assassinated.
Through all of this upheaval and
treachery, the boy Anawrahta seems to have
simply got on with things. He was allowed
to keep his royal status at court and to
live there with his mother, and in
exchange he attended to the two kings
who had overthrown his father and taken
away the throne that would one day have
been his. But when Anawrahta had reached
the age of 30, King Sokkate took things
too far.
He referred to Anawrahta at court using
the word Nyitha-naungme, a compound word
that means something like brother-son.
Confused by this, Anawrahta traveled to
the monastery where his father had been
exiled and asked him what it meant.
To the old embittered former king, the
meaning of this was clear;
Sokkate intended to marry Anawrahta's
mother.
Anawrahta told that word to his father
King Kyaungbyu, and his father said,
‘Because he wishes to take thy mother,
thus he speaks.’  Anawrahta
was exceedingly angry and he begged for
the horse and weapons and gear that
Sakra gave his father,
and his father gave him the Areindama
lance, the Thilawuntha sword, the ruby ring,
and the ruby hairpin.
It's hard to know whether Anawrahta was
truly motivated by his mother's honor or
whether he had been planning this the
whole time and had just now found a
convenient excuse.
Whatever the case, Anawrahta rose in
rebellion against his stepbrother.
He fled to the holy volcano, Mount Popa,
and marshaled his forces there, gathering
lords and chieftains who had had enough
of the brothers treacherous antics. Then
he marched on the capital of Bagan.
The Glass Palace Chronicle records what
happened next.
Now, when he had mustered his forces, he
marched on Bagan and sent a message to
his brother saying, will you give up the
throne or will you do battle? And when
Sokkate heard the words of his younger
brother, he was exceedingly wrathful and
answered, his mother's milk is yet wet
upon his lips, and he says he will fight
me? Let all my ministers look on. I will
fight him man to man, on horseback. When
Anawrahta heard his brother's words, he was
glad, and when the appointed day was come,
he took the lance and sword his father
had given him and mounted the demon
horse and came to the stream of Tamati,
and Sokkate, his brother, saw him coming
and went forth to meet him. Then said,
‘Anawrahta, brother, you the elder strike
first,’ and
Sokkate thrust at him with his lance,
but Anawrahta parried it with the Areindama
lance, and it reached not his body but pierced
the pommel of his saddle, and when
Sokkate saw it, he was sore afraid and
trembled.
Then said Anawrahta, ‘Brother, your turn is
over. Now it is mine. Meet it as best you
can.’
And he smote him and pierced him with
the Areindama lance so that it went in
at the front and came out behind.
Sokkate’s horse ran away with him to
the river, and there he died.
This encounter, as rendered in the Glass
Palace Chronicle, feels like something
out of the Arthurian legends, complete
with chivalric duels, legendary weapons
of great power, and the fight to save a
woman's honor. We would be foolish to
take it at face value as a historical
source, but it does give us a sense for
the turbulent political landscape of
medieval Myanmar and what must have
seemed like the clashing of great heroic
forces, the stuff of medieval romances, of
myth and poetry.
With his brother defeated, Anawrahta took
the throne.
The chronicle records that Anawrahta was
riven with guilt over the death of his
brother, and attempted to soothe his
conscience with the construction of
great temples and works of
infrastructure throughout the kingdom.
Anawrahta could not sleep for full six
months because he had slain his elder
brother.
Then Sakra visited him with a dream,
saying, ‘King, if thou wouldst mitigate
thine evil deed and sinning against thy
elder brother, build many pagodas,
monasteries, and rest houses, and share
the merit with thine elder brother.
Devise thou many wells, ponds, dams and
ditches, fields and canals,
and share the merit with thine elder
brother.’
Archaeological evidence does show that
Anawrahta was indeed a prolific builder.
Soon after coming to the throne in the
year 1044, he marched into the north to
secure the northern border, and built 43
forts along the Irrawaddy River.
The north was traditionally the gateway
to Burma, the lands through which all
potential conquerors had previously
marched, and so it's clear he was keen to
secure his land from invasion.
King Anawrahta built his network of
fortresses as an armored corridor that
protected the valuable farmlands of the
north and allowed his armies to move
quickly along well-supplied routes. He
also fortified many of the towns in this
region, building strong city walls and
garrisons,
while in the north he also built
extensive irrigation canals and improved
the existing water infrastructure to get
the most out of the land's potential, and
many of the canals and reservoirs that
he built are still in use today, nearly a
thousand years later.
Having secured the north to his
satisfaction, King Anawrahta turned his
attention to the south.
The coastal cities of southern Myanmar
were a clutter of independent
city states, many of which had grown
wealthy on the traffic of trade, but
passed by sea to the lands of India and
China.
Passage through the mountains that
surround Myanmar was difficult, and so
most goods that came into the country
flowed through these port towns.
Having the good farmland was one thing,
but if Bagan had to keep paying the
trade tariffs to these wealthy port
cities, it could never become the kind of
great power that King Anawrahta clearly
dreamed of.
According to the chronicles, he marched
south and first besieged the city of
Thaton, as the Glass Palace Chronicle
records, although it's worth noting that
in its typically exaggerated style, it's
probably multiplying the size of the
army by at least a factor of a thousand.
He gathered all his mighty men of valor
and marched by land and water.
By water he sent 800,000 boats and
80 million fighting men. By land he made his
four generals march up front, while he
marched forth with the main army in the
rear.
His land force, it is said, contained
800,000 elephants, 8 million
horses, and 18 million fighting
men. It is said that the line of troops
was so long that when the first troops
of the army reached the frontier of
Thaton territory, the rear guard still had
not departed from the capital.
Seeing as this enormous force would far
exceed the population of Burma today and
would have constituted about a quarter
of the world's total population at the
time, we can assume this is an
exaggeration, but through exaggeration
the chronicles make their point; the army
was no doubt impressive.
With this force, he laid siege to the
city of Thaton, and after holding out for
three months, the city capitulated.
From there, Anawrahta absorbed a number
of the other coastal cities into what
was now becoming a true empire.
By this time, the city of Bagan had
earned itself the Sanskrit title
Arimaddana-pura, or the city that tramples
its enemies.
Linking his capital to these coastal
cities meant that Bagan was now
connected by sea routes to the great
centers of culture in India, and perhaps
most crucially, with the island of Sri
Lanka.
Sri Lanka is a nation off the coast of
Southern India, and for much of its
history it has held on to a distinct
cultural character.
While Buddhism, in its homeland of
mainland India, had mostly died out by
this point, it had survived in Sri Lanka,
and this island nation had become the
heartland of an ancient and austere form
of Buddhism known as Theravada.
These new cultural links would transform
the culture and religion of Myanmar, and
bring it into contact with new forms of
religious thought, and for King
Anawrahta, freshly returned from the
battlefields of the south, they would
provide an irresistible opportunity.
That was a chance to take on some of his
oldest rivals, not an enemy kingdom or
empire, but an institution at the heart
of his own kingdom,
the Buddhist church itself.
For centuries, a strain of Buddhism known
as Ari Buddhism was the predominant form
of religion in Myanmar.
Ari Buddhism was a hybrid form of
Tibetan Buddhism and drew heavily on
traditional Burmese beliefs.
As a result, their practices were quite
different to how we might picture a
Buddhist monk today.
Unlike in most strains of Buddhism, the
Ari monks grew beards and had long hair.
They wore blue-black robes dyed with
indigo, drank alcohol, and practiced a
form of martial arts similar to boxing.
They rode horses and even occasionally
went to war.
They also worshiped the figure of the
Naga, a powerful form of snake spirit
drawn from Hindu mythology, and built
statues depicting these in their temples.
Owing to their long history in Burma, the
Ari monks enjoyed enormous power in the
kingdom of Bagan. They owned vast estates
and held enormous stores of wealth.
The Maya Yazawin, or Great Chronicle, even
records the scandalous claim that the
monks were practicing a version of the
right of prima noctae, or first night,
taking the virginity of brides before
their wedding nights.
From then on, the sons and daughters of
all, starting with and including the king,
ministers, generals, village
administrators, at that time when
preparing to get married, must be sent to
the monks at nightfall to give the prime of
their flower of virginity.
It was said that at dawn they were freed
and allowed to wed. The king, having
matured, had become virtuous, and he was
disconsolate to hear and observe such
wrongful practices.
It's hard to know whether to take this
scurrilous claim seriously or whether
it was a later piece of royal propaganda
designed to discredit these monks, but
one thing was for certain; the Ari monks
were extremely powerful, and King Anawrahta
had long dreamed of crushing their
establishment and remaking the church in
a different image,
an image more closely under the control
of the crown.
King Anawrahta would find the opportunity
to do this when he met a visiting sage
named Shin Arahan.
This Shin Arahan was from the south of
Myanmar, the region Anawrahta had recently
absorbed. The sage had traveled in Sri
Lanka, and he told King Anawrahta of the
merits of the different branch of
Buddhism practiced there, a branch that
claimed to be the closest to the
original teachings of the Buddha. This
was the Theravada Buddhism incubated in
the grand Sri Lankan cities of
Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa.
This strain of Buddhism emphasizes
priests living simple lives, living by
begging, not eating after midday, refusing
all intoxicants, and not even touching
money.
Considering the seemingly uncontrollable
nature of Burma's Ari monks, to King
Anawrahta, this must have sounded ideal.
The Glass Palace Chronicle recounts the
king's conversion as a spiritual
epiphany.
The king was full of joy and rapture, and
spoke again, entreating him, my Lord,
preach me somewhat -- yes, but a little -- of
the law preached by the lord, the master,
and Shin Arahan preached the law,
beginning with the things not to be
neglected.
Then the king's heart was full of faith,
steadfast and immovable.
Faith sank into him as oil filtered a
hundred times soaks into cotton a
hundred times teased.
Perhaps King Anawrahta was genuinely moved
by the sage's teachings, but it's clear
he also spotted an opportunity.
If he brought this new branch of
Buddhism to his kingdom, he could weaken
the hold of the Ari monks.
So, King Anawrahta went to war with the
church.
First, the king went after the monks’
ability to recruit.
He brought in new laws that meant that
common people were no longer obliged to
give up their young children to become
monks, as they had been before.
Next he changed the law to remove the
punishment for those who deserted their
life as a monk. As a result, many
dissatisfied monks simply hung up their
robes and left to do something else.
Bit by bit, Anawrahta chipped away at the
monks’ power with every tool at his
disposal.
There were, of course, those who fought
the changes. Anawrahta banished thousands
of monks who resisted his reforms. Many
of these fled to the nearby volcano of
Mount Popa or east into the narrow
forested valleys of the Shan Hills, and
while they were never completely wiped
out, they would never again wield the
same power in the kingdom.
To celebrate the conversion of his land,
Anawrahta sent an envoy to Sri Lanka and
asked rather boldly that their most
precious relic, a tooth belonging to the
Buddha himself, be sent to Myanmar to be
placed in one of his great temples.
The Sri Lankans understandably refused,
but at the last moment they remembered
that they had a spare, and the envoy was
sent back to Burma with what they were
told was another tooth of the Buddha.
Like the small fragments of wood taken
from the cross used at Jesus's
crucifixion that showed up in churches
across Medieval Europe, teeth of the
Buddha had a way of multiplying in
Southeast Asia according to the needs of
the people.
But it was good enough for Anawrahta. When
the new tooth relic arrived in the
capital by boat, the king himself waded
out into the river to meet it. Anawrahta
was an effective ruler, but at times he
could also be uncompromising and harsh.
While he was often able to achieve what
he wanted in his kingdom, he did this
largely at the expense of his popularity,
and this is nowhere more apparent than
in the story that is remembered as the
tragic romance of his son, Kyansittha.
Kyansittha was a great general and had led his
father's armies into battle many times,
and when the people in the region of
Pegu complained about raiders destroying
their homes and stealing their animals,
the king sent Kyansittha to deal with
the situation.
The story goes that the prince saw off
the raiders, and the people of Pegu were
so grateful that they sent him home with
various gifts for the king, gifts of gold,
hairs belonging to the Buddha, and a
beautiful young woman named U Khin,
intended to be offered to the king as a
bride. It
was on the journey home Prince Kyansittha
and U Khin fell in love.
When Anawrahta found out about this
Arthurian betrayal, he exiled his own son,
who was forced to flee across the
countryside of Myanmar and go into
hiding. This story, with its forbidden
love, betrayal, and dramatic finale, has
proved irresistible to generations of
playwrights, songwriters, and poets in
Myanmar.
But ultimately, it seems that this
uncompromising nature would finally lead
to the downfall of King Anawrahta.
On the 11th of April, 1077, the king was
riding through the outskirts of Bagan on
the back of his elephant.
The chronicles record that a tree spirit
that the king had previously displeased
appeared in the guise of a wild buffalo
and gored him to death, and then demons
took away his body
so that it was never found.
Much more likely is that the king's
unpopularity finally got the better of
him and he was ambushed and killed by a
group of rivals who ensured that no
evidence remained of their crime.
The chronicles recall his death with
great sorrow.
Thus this noble king, full of glory, might
of arm and dominion, who for full 33
years of royal prosperity had advanced
the welfare of the religion, his own
welfare, and that of the generations of
his sons, grandsons, and great-grandsons,
died at the age of 75. About the time of
his death, bees clave to the throne door
of the palace, an ogre laughed from the
top of the Tharaba gate, and luster of
the royal sword faded, and a vulture
alighted on the palace.
After the death of the great king
Anawrahta, his son Sawlu took the throne
at the age of 26.
Although not particularly young by the
standards of royalty, he would soon gain
the title Min Lulin, or the Boy King, on
account of his inexperienced and naive
style of ruling.
After only five years of mismanaging the
kingdom, he faced a rebellion in the
south among the Mon people who lived in
the coastal cities that his father had
conquered.
For not the first time, the chronicles
recall a quite unlikely-sounding version
of events.
In this version of the story, the king
Sawlu lost at a game of dice with one of
his nobles, a childhood friend of his
named Yamankan, and in a fit of sore
losing rage, he dared the noble to rebel
against him.
One day, the king and Yamankan played at
dice, and Yamankan won, and he rose up
and clapped his elbows.
Said King Sawlu, ‘You have won a mere game
of dice, and you dare to arise and clap
your elbows.
If you are a man, rebel with Pegu, your
province.’
‘In truth?’ asked Yamankan.
‘We kings,’ said the king,
‘should we utter anything but truth?’
According to the chronicle, Yamankan
promptly returned to Pegu and started a
rebellion, as the king had suggested.
While this account may not exactly be
true, it probably does contain some truth
about the character of King Sawlu, who by
all accounts had a petty and childish
nature and seems to have treated the
business of ruling as though it were
little more than a game.
Now facing an open rebellion, the
childish King Sawlu turned to someone
that his father had long ago exiled for
the crime of falling in love with a
woman promised to him.
That is his half-brother, the romantic
hero of songs and poetry, the man named
Kyansittha. Kyansittha
came out of exile and agreed to help the
childish king lead his armies against
the rebellion in the south,
but King Sawlu would prove to have no
better judgment on the battlefield than
off it, and he would be fooled one day by
a devious ploy. King Sawlu and Kyansittha
encamped when they reached the island of
Pye-dawta, saying, ‘It is too late today;
tomorrow we shall fight.’
Then in the dim moonlight, Yamankan
came forth and provoked them to do
battle.
So, they followed and fought without heed
or observation, and the King Sawlu,
thinking that an elephant figure sat in
the mud was a real elephant,
set forth to fight, and the royal
elephant he was riding fell into the mud
and stuck.
King Sawlu climbed down from his back
and ran, and entering a hole in the
banyan tree in the forest, hid there, and
his elephant was captured, and the whole
army was despoiled and fled.
There was none to stop them.
Sawlu was soon found hiding in the banyan
tree and was taken into captivity by the
rebel Yamankan. According to another
slightly fantastical episode in the
chronicles, Sawlu did actually have one
chance to escape when the hero
Kyansittha personally snuck into the enemy
camp to rescue him.
But Sawlu feared that Kyansittha secretly
wanted to kill him, and he refused to go
with his rescuer.
He believed that the rebel Yamankan,
who had been his friend and who he had
played many games of dice with, would not
harm him. And he stole him from the place where he was kept. Now while Kyansittha bare him on his
shoulder, Sawlu thought,
‘Kyansittha is one whom my father has
injured, whom I have injured. I fear he
steals me away to kill me. But Yamankan
is son of my tutor; surely he will not
kill me.’
Sawlu yelled out, ‘Kyansittha is stealing me!’
Kyansittha exclaimed, ‘Then die you fool. Die
the death of a dog at the hands of these
scum,’ flung him down, and ran for his life.
He swam across the Irrawaddy and
eventually made back to safety.
But like many of his other calculations,
Sawlu's gamble didn't pay off.
Fearing more escape attempts, Yamankan
had the king killed in April of the year
1084.
In the game of life, it seems the king
Sawlu was always rolling ones.
After the death of Sawlu, Kyansittha
continued to lead the royal armies of
Bagan against Yamankan's rebellion, and
the rebel leader fled south on the river
on his opulent golden barge.
Kyansittha sent a hunter named Ya-sin to
follow him and to kill him if he could.
The chronicle recounts what happened
next.
Ya-sin in the hunter caught him up
below Ywatha, and he climbed a fig
tree and uttered lovely notes like the
voice of a bird.
When Yamankan heard that sound, he
opened the door of the golden raft
and looked, saying,
‘What bird is that uttering notes so sweet
and wonderful?’
Now he had but one good eye, and Ya-sin
the hunter, from the place where he
waited peeping, drew his bow and shot and
hit the eye of Yamankan,
and he died.
Now the once-exiled Kyansittha was the
only person in line for the throne.
Kyansittha came to the throne on the 21st of April,
1084, and assumed the title Sri Tribhuvanaditya
Dhammaraja, which means something like
fortunate Buddhist king, son of the three
worlds.
In many ways, he was the perfect uniting
figure for the country after such a
period of violence and division.
While in exile from his father, he had
lived for seven years in the southern
Mon region among those coastal cities,
and there he had developed a genuine
love for the Mon people and culture.
Kyansittha invited Mon nobles to court and
appointed them to high positions in the
kingdom, some of whom had been part of
the rebellion only years before.
The result of this generous approach was
a long period of peace in Myanmar, and
with that peace came a period of great
prosperity.
During this time, the capital city of
Bagan grew to previously unimaginable
size and wealth.
The population boomed as a result of the
growing agricultural potential of the
city, but Bagan also attracted people
from across the region; artists, sculptors,
masons, architects, monks, scholars, and
teachers.
We can track the booming of the city in
the ever-increasing number of temples
that were built in the 300 years after
the reign of King Anawrahta, each of which
we can reliably date with carbon dating.
During this time, as many as 4,000
temples were built, along with
thousands more brick structures
supporting them.
Many of these temples had vast stupas or
domed shrines at their center, and the
effort and expense of constructing these
must have been enormous.
This building effort would have required
an army of masons and carpenters,
plasterers and sculptors, gold and
silversmiths, either paid in cash or
working in exchange for food, animals, and
land. These artists would have required
the support of an even larger array of
supporting industries. Masons required
brickbuilders who required firewood
brought by lumberjacks and porters. The
sculptors of countless statues of the
Buddha needed miners of marble and
dolerite
and elephant trainers to transport the
heavy stone blocks,
and all of them needed rice, fruit,
vegetables, meat, and game, and of course
the alcoholic spirits brewed from rice
or the foaming toddy made from the
fermented sap of the palm tree.
With work to be had in every corner of
the city, people traveled for thousands
of kilometers to find employment in the
enormous construction site that the city
of Bagan had become.
At one point, the Glass Palace Chronicle
lists the professions of people who were
deported from a conquered city during
the reign of King Anawrahta, and from it we
get a sense of all the ways that someone
could make their livelihood in the city
of Bagan.
Thereafter he sent away separately,
without mixing, such men as were skilled
in carving, turning, and painting; masons,
molders of plaster and flower patterns,
blacksmiths, silversmiths, braziers,
founders of gongs and symbols, filigree
flower workers, doctors and trainers of
elephants and horses, makers of shields
round and embossed, men skilled in frying,
parching, baking, and frizzling, yakin
hairdressers, and men cunning in perfumes,
odors, flowers, and the juices of flowers.
From the small fortress capital that
it had once been, Bagan expanded to fill an
area of more than 100 square kilometers,
or more than twice the size of ancient
Rome.
Estimates for the population around this
time range as high as 400,000 people
living in the city alone.
During this time, many of the largest
temples were constructed, and the largest
of all is the temple known as the
Thatbyinnyu Temple.
Consecrated in the year 1144, the vast
spired pagoda of this temple rises to a
height of over 61 meters, or more than 20
stories.
Another temple nearby is called the
Ananda Temple, and it rises to a height
of 51 meters. This temple served not only
as a place of worship, but also as a
monastery and a library. The temple's
first and second floors were used as the
residents of monks, while the third floor
was used to hold images. The fourth floor
was used to store manuscripts and books,
and the fifth and top floor stored the
precious relics.
The building of temples in Bagan was
seen as the ultimate form of devotion
that a king could engage in.
When one later king Alaungsithu
dedicated the completing of the Shwegugyi
pagoda, he spoke the following
prayer in which he envisions the temples
as a kind of grand infrastructure of the
soul as a bridge across Samsara, or the
endless cycle of rebirth, and towards
eternal enlightenment.
By this abundant merit, I desire here nor
hereafter no angelic pomp of Brahmas,
Suras, Maras, nor the state and splendors
of a monarch, nay not even to be the
pupil of the conqueror. But I would build
a causeway sheer across the river of
Samsara, and all folk would speed across
thereby until they reached the Blessed
City.
These temples were held in the highest
reverence. One of the inscriptions at the
unfinished Mingun Pahtodawgyi
temple, built some time after the Bagan
era, contains the following blessings for
those who respect the sanctity of the
temple, as well as a series of blistering
curses against any who damage or
desecrate it.
Who favors and upholds like me the gift
of faith which I thus offer with all my
heart? Be he my son, grandson, or any
future king who comes after me, queens,
princes, royal ministers high or low, may
he be favored above others with the
wheel of treasure. May he be endued like
King Mandhata with glory, majesty, and
power.
But whoever spoils even so much as an
oil lamp here, may he be oppressed with
the eight dangers, the ten punishments,
the 32 results of karma, the eight
calamities, the 96 diseases. May he be
suddenly overtaken with a great
affliction which a thousand doctors may
not avail to cure. Having suffered thus
for long, generation after generation,
when his bodily elements dissolve, may he
suffer by going in and out among the
eight chief Hells, and the twelve minor
Hells, and the 40 limbos of Yama and
Lokika. May he suffer with the hosts of
demons, titans, and hungry ghosts. Even if
he survive all these sufferings, may he
revisit five thousand times these lands
in the form of a boneless and miserable
creature, a ghost, a worm, a water leech.
While royal annals like the Glass Palace
Chronicle are extremely detailed on the
comings and goings of Bagan's kings,
unfortunately they have very little to
say about what life was like for the
average person during this time.
For a picture of daily life for the
average person in Bagan, we can turn to
the pages of the classical poetry of
Myanmar.
Myanmar has had a great poetic tradition
for centuries, and the time of Bagan was
no exception. Many poets flourished among
its scholarly communities, in its temples
and royal courts, and the manuscripts
that these scholars produced were
exceptionally valuable.
Records show that in the year 1273, a
complete set of the Buddhist texts known
as the Tripitaka, cost up to 3,000 kyats,
or nearly 50 kilos of silver. That would
be enough to buy more than 5,000 acres
of riceland, four large monasteries, or
150 slaves.
The exceeding expense of these texts
meant that literacy was never widespread,
and most common people would not learn
to read or write.
One 15th century poet named Shin
Maharattathara wrote a poem that describes
the qualities required by a man of
learning.
If one does not try with the eagerness
of a daring eagle that firmly catches a
hen, if one does not study and ponder,
does not question and does not discuss
and knows only how to read palm leaves,
how can one become a well-known man of
letters? Like a cat eating a shrimp with
special enjoyment, a learner must study
all texts. He must become sharp as teeth
of a saw penetrating deeply into all
discussed matters, to unravel the subject
from beginning to end without fear like
a lion.
One area that these poets can really
educate us about is in the realm of food.
A 17th century poet named Wungyi Padethayaza
gives a description of the diet of an
ordinary farmer who supplements his
meals of rice and curry with various
kinds of animal life that he finds in
his fields.
The peasant plows his field, and in his
rice fields are water-filled holes, home
to many small crabs. Tossing these into
his shoulder basket together with frogs,
snails, su-pou plants, kazoon and kinhon
leaves, and pilo, all for his curry.
Stoopingly, he goes back home.
Sweet and juicy is the curry, cooked on
arrival and laid out quickly with kyan-
-hing and kee-wet-na vegetables. The rice is
hot, and the curry is hopped with pungent
spices that make one suck, tht, tht, tht.
Scooping sizable handfuls, bending he
eats, surrounded on all sides by his sons
and grandsons.
Another source of information is the
painted walls of certain temples and
pagodas in Bagan, which show us a little
of the city's dress styles too, at least
among the wealthy.
The people's costumes in these paintings
are combinations of Indian and Chinese
cultures. They wore long dresses and
shawls, with most of the materials made
of silk and cotton. Both men and women
wore bangles on their wrists and arms,
necklaces and foot chains, and seemed to
have worn jeweled belts on their waists.
One prominent cultural practice among
many ethnic groups in Burma was
extensive tattooing, especially of the
legs, and this would likely have been
evident on the streets of Bagan.
One European visitor in the 19th century
commented on this practice.
Every male Berman is tattooed in his
boyhood from the middle to his knees. In
fact, he has a pair of breeches tattooed
on him.
The pattern is a fanciful medley of
animals and arabesques.
But ultimately, the people who lived out
their countless lives in the streets and
alleys of Bagan, farming rice and
cucumbers, tending to their animals and
constructing the temples, have been
forgotten, and it's only the raging
dramas of the Royal Court that have been
remembered in any true detail. In the
coming centuries, those dramas would
reach a fever pitch.
Throughout his reign, King Kyansittha
struggled to have a son, so much so that
he almost lost hope.
Without a son to provide a clear line of
inheritance, the kingdom could be thrust
into civil war.
When a son was finally born to him in
the year 1090, he was so overjoyed that
he immediately crowned the baby boy king,
and stepped down to serve only as his
regent.
The boy was called Sithu.
Kyansittha would die 22 years later, and
his son Sithu took the throne with no
opposition.
Like his father, he would be an excellent
ruler in terms of politics and warfare,
but it seems he wasn't the best parent.
He had several sons, but before they
could come of age, it became clear that
for one reason or another, his oldest son
was not suitable for the throne, and so,
Sithu had him banished.
The second son, who would go on to take
the throne, was a man named Narathu, and he
has been remembered to history as a
tyrant and a psychopath.
When King Sithu finally fell ill in his
old age, this impatient son took the
opportunity to speed up his inheritance.
Now when he reached the age of 101, he
fell grievously sick. His son Narathu
removed him from the throne and kept him
within Schwegu pagoda.
The king recovered consciousness a
while and said, ‘This is not my palace.
Whose trickery is this?’
The king was convulsed with anger;
his whole body burned like fire. Then his
son Narathu thought, ‘If the king arises
from his sickness, I shall be utterly
destroyed.’ So with clothes and garments,
he pressed down the king
until he died.
Narathu wanted to take the throne for
himself, but there was still the problem
of his banished older brother.
He devised a plan to place his brother
on the throne first to make things look
a little less suspicious, but of course
he would not sit there for long.
When he reached Leppan Port, Narathu,
according to the oath he had sworn, went
down to the boat and, shouldering his
brother's sword, he raised and set him on
the throne. After his anointing, his food
was poisoned, and that night he died.
With all these threats dealt with, King
Narathu ascended to the throne himself,
and he would rule in a predictably
tyrannical style, as the Glass Palace
Chronicle recalls.
King Narathu had once been the demon
guardian of a mountain who had shaded
the Lord, so he was great in glory, might,
and dominion. His ministers, both great
and small, his followers, and all the
people stood in fear and awe of him. He
raged furiously with wrath and pride. The
king was brutal and savage. His queens,
concubines, and handmaids stood in fear
and awe of him and loved him not, but
hated him and cursed him in their hearts.
All the inhabitants of the kingdom
starved in toil and sweat, and many forts,
villages, and domains were ruined.
Seemingly desperate to assuage his guilt
for his heinous actions, Narathu
increasingly isolated himself in his
palace and ordered the construction of
what he intended to be the largest and
most ambitious of all of Bagan's temples,
known as the Dhammayangyi Temple.
But Narathu would not live to see this
great temple completed. It's not clear
who gave the order, but Narathu was in his
palace one day when he was approached by
a group of eight men dressed as monks.
When the men got close enough to the
king, they drew their daggers and each
stabbed him. When they were sure that he
was dead, in a kind of suicide pact, they
turned their knives on each other and
themselves, as the Glass Palace Chronicle
records.
They ascended the palace and drew nigh
the king, encircling him under guise of
presenting the conch and neza grass, and
they pierced the king with the sword
until he died. Thereafter they pursued
the minister Theiddika to pierce him, but
they could not catch him.
Then they pierced their own bodies with
the sword and died, all eight of them.
The reign of King Narathu did great
damage to the kingdom of Bagan and
harmed its reputation abroad.
But in the end it wasn't tyranny,
rebellion, or kingly blundering that
brought down the empire.
After several more royal assassinations,
coups and throne seizures, the kingdom
would eventually return to peace under
the long reign of a king named Narapatisithu,
who would reign until the year
1211.
But all this time, the forces that would
eventually tear this great city of
temples apart were already at work. In
fact, in an ironic twist of fate, it would
be the temples themselves that would
contribute to the gradual weakening and
the eventual fall of this entire
civilization.
Despite the efforts of King Anawrahta
to reign in the excessive power and
wealth of the Ari monks, the Theravada
church that replaced them would soon
become just as wealthy, and by the height
of Bagan's golden age, it would far
surpass the wealth and power that its
predecessors had enjoyed.
For the rulers of Bagan, the church was a
powerful tool for building their own
legitimacy among their subjects.
The kings of Burma ruled under the title
Dharma Raja, meaning a king who would
uphold the duties of the church.
Whenever a new king was crowned, he would
begin his reign by lavishing gifts on
nearby religious institutions, building
new temples and donating plots of land
to the monks.
But it wasn't just the king who
contributed to these institutions;
the church also encouraged private
citizens to donate land and money in
exchange for benefits when they were
reborn in the next life. One ancient
Burmese poem offers a starkly
transactional approach to these
incentives, offering a kind of tiered
system of rewards.
He who gives and urges others to give
things in charity will be reborn rich,
surrounded by numerous attendants, and
holding vast possessions.
He will be a shining moon in the
assembly of men.
He who earnestly encourages others to
give donations freely while himself
offering nothing, in future rebirths will
be deficient in material belongings, yet
many attendants and relatives, sons and
grandsons will be in his entourage.
Whosoever neither himself is generous,
nor urges others to be, will encounter
evil fate after his body's dissolution,
never feeling satiated, scarcely finding
eating plants, showing hunger day and
night. He will become a hungry spirit,
meeting all kinds of misery.
With such punishments awaiting those who
refused to donate to the church in the
next life, it's not hard to see why
people donated freely and generously.
These donations of gold, goods, and labor
made the church incredibly wealthy, but
it was the donations of land that really
tipped the balance in the kingdom.
Anything given to the church was given
forever, and so as time went on, an
increasingly large amount of the landmass
of Myanmar and much of its
productive farmland was slowly donated
away piece by piece to the Buddhist
church.
This wouldn't have been so much of a
problem except for one thing; that's the
fact that according to a long-standing
tradition, the Buddhist church in Bagan
was exempt from paying all taxes.
This meant that these large temple
estates ended up acting like tax havens.
Today the equivalent of 10% of the
world's wealth is held in tax havens,
where the rich keep their money to avoid
paying tax on it. But in some modern
states like Russia, several Latin
American countries like Argentina, and in
the oil states of the Persian Gulf, the
amount of wealth held in offshore tax
havens can exceed 60 percent.
A state's ability to function is
directly linked to its ability to raise
funds and to marshal its collective
resources for the public good.
Money taken into tax havens has
effectively left the economy, and in
Myanmar between the 10th and the 13th
centuries, the situation began to look
similar to some of the modern world's
worst areas for tax evasion. In Bagan, by
the late 13th century, as much as 63
percent of the kingdom's land that had
once belonged to the crown, as well as
the majority of its gold and silver, was
in the hands of the tax-exempt church.
For successive kings of Bagan, this
resulted in something of a bind.
Their entire legitimacy rested on the
system of belief that began and ended
with the Buddhist church, and so the
thought of using any kind of force to
seize land from the unarmed Buddhist
monks was unthinkable.
The church wasn't just a beloved
religious institution. It was also the
land's biggest employer, and countless
people depended on it for their
livelihood.
So, if the Burmese kings had any hope
of getting their land back, they would
have to use the doctrines of the church
against it.
Buddhist doctrines in Burma did allow
for a sort of release valve on the power
and influence of the church.
Monks were supposed to live by the
Vinaya, or the Buddhist code of conduct,
which emphasizes relinquishing yourself
of Earthly possessions,
and it was considered the duty of kings
to periodically purge the church when it
wandered too far from this ideal. If the
church had become too wealthy, then by
definition it must have strayed from the
Vinaya, and so a process called Sasana
could begin.
This was a kind of inquisition in which
individual temples were inspected and
excess wealth or land could be
confiscated, according to a strict
religious code.
It was a way for the crown to claw back
some of the wealth it had lost to the
church,
but the process of Sasana was slow and
often insufficient.
Once a stage of Sasana purifying of the
church was finished, often the population
felt newly inspired to donate to their
now pure and righteous church, and money
would start flowing back to the monks in
even greater amounts.
After a king had purified the church, his
descendants would often give even more
lavish donations the moment they came to
the throne in order to increase their
own legitimacy.
So, over the centuries, the wealth of
the empire of Bagan flowed in only one
direction, from the great reservoir of
the royal treasury downhill into the
tax-exempt sector of the religious
establishment. The historian Michael
Aung-Thwin summarizes the situation in the
following terms.
The kingdom of Bagan declined because
the factors that had nurtured it in the
first place became in time forces that
contradicted and destroyed it. The seeds
that sowed the destruction of Bagan are
what earlier made its success possible,
and the institutions that led to
prosperity and power eventually
involuted and impoverished the state.
What had been a blessing became a curse.
But because Bagan society was unable and
unwilling to change what were once
constructive forces when they became
destructive ones, the political power of
the dynasty collapsed.
By the reign of a king named Htilominlo,
who ruled in the early 13th century, it's
clear that the royal treasury was
struggling. He was the last king of Bagan
to build any significant temples,
although he did so mostly in remote
regions away from the capital.
The kings who followed would be
apparently penniless, and no great
constructions would go up after this
period.
When discussing the collapse of
societies, historians often talk about
what they call the remote origins of the
collapse.
These are slow, broad trends that build
up over time, cracks that begin to appear
and wear away at the structure, sometimes
invisible, and then there's what they
call the immediate origins. This is the
wrecking ball that comes swinging in and
delivers one decisive blow that
reverberates through the cracked and
weakened structure and sends the whole
thing shattering into smithereens.
The state of Bagan’s reduced ability to
Marshal its land and resources was not
fatal by itself, but it left it
increasingly vulnerable to outside
events.
In the year 1258, a series of rebellions
began in South Arakan and Martaban, and
posed a challenge to the empire.
With as much as two-thirds of its land
held by the church, the Bagan state
struggled to fund the military campaign
necessary to contain these rebellions.
Though it would ultimately bring order
back to those regions after a struggle
of many years, it was a clear indication
of the weakened state of the country.
But soon, an even more terrible threat
began to loom.
This was a force of the size and
strength that the people of Bagan had
never encountered before, a force that
even now was sweeping across the
Eurasian landmass, washing away empires
that had ruled for centuries, and leaving
death and destruction in its wake.
These were the armies of the Mongol
emperor Kublai Khan.
Kublai Khan was a grandson of the great
Mongol warlord Genghis Khan, who had
united the steppe peoples of Mongolia and
led them on a campaign of conquest the
likes of which the world had never seen,
conquering lands from the South China
Sea to the Mediterranean, from Siberia to
Afghanistan.
Kublai was 12 years old when his
grandfather Genghis Khan died, and after
the death of the great Khan, the vast
Mongol empire began to split into
warring rival states.
Kublai Khan would find himself at the
head of the Chinese portion of the
Mongol Empire, and founded a dynasty
known as the Yuan, with his capital at
Beijing.
In just three generations, the Mongols
had gone from nomadic wanderers to
emperors, and over time, the Yuan Dynasty
would come to rule over most of
present-day China, Mongolia, Korea, and
Southern Siberia.
In the late 13th century, at the same
time that the Bagan Empire was
struggling to contain its rebellious
northern provinces and claw back some of
its land and wealth from its church, the
emperor Kublai Khan was engaged in an
immense war against his last remaining
rivals in China. These were the Southern
Song Dynasty, a large Chinese kingdom
that had until now resisted the advances
of the Mongols.
But by the year 1270, the Song were on
the ropes.
Kublai Khan had blockaded the Yangtze
River, cutting off their supply routes,
and he was now keen to encircle and
destroy any remaining Song armies.
But he had one problem;
there was still a single remaining
escape route for the Song armies, and
that was through the narrow mountain
passes in the southwest of China and
into the lands of Myanmar.
If the Song armies were able to escape
through the lands of Bagan, they could
continue their fight.
So, Kublai Khan resolved to bring the
empire of Bagan under his sway and close
off the Song's final escape route.
With his forces all tied up in total war
against the Song, Kublai at first had no
desire for conflict with Bagan.
He sent an envoy to the Burmese court
and demanded that the king there swear
loyalty to him and pay a small tribute.
As Mongol tactics went, this was about as
polite as you could get.
But things would not go according to his
plan.
The king of Bagan at this time was a man
named Narathihapate.
He was a man of overwhelming appetites,
who loved his food and drink so much so
that the Glass Palace Chronicle records
that he was the reincarnation of an ogre
who lived on Mount Popa.
The Lord had left a prophecy upon the
top of Mount Tangvi that the ogre,
guardian of the mountain, should become
king thrice in Bagan.
Even so, it came to pass, for he became
king once, it is said, as Narathihapate,
and because he had become a man from the
state of an ogre, he was violent in envy,
proud and wrathful, and gluttonous in
eating and drinking.
He was great in wrath, haughtiness, and
envy, exceeding covetous and ambitious. He
had three thousand concubines and maids
of honor.
If the chronicles are to be believed,
this King Narathihapate also ruled
tyrannically, with some of his
preoccupations ranging into the
territory of the bizarre.
The king, being one who had received the
Lord's prophecy, suffered not from any of
the 96 diseases, and never so much has
sneezed nor yawned. So, none was
allowed to sneeze or yawn in his
presence. If anyone happened to sneeze or
yawn, he beheaded him.
One day, a young handmaid in the king's
presence was dearly desired to sneeze,
and because she could not refrain it she
put her face to a great jar and sneezed,
hoping that the king would not hear, but
alas, the sound was louder than if she
had sneezed openly, and the king asked,
‘What sound is that?’
It's only through the gentle
intervention of one of his queens that
the unfortunate girl was allowed to
escape with her life. King Narathihapate
was also given over to boasting,
especially about his famous appetite, as
one inscription left by him at the
Mingalar Zedi Pagoda in 1274 shows.
King Narathihapate, supreme commander of
36 million soldiers and who is the
consumer of 300 dishes of curry daily,
enshrined 51 gold and silver figurines
of kings, queens, nobles, and maids of
honor, on Thursday the full moon of
Kason of the year 636.
So, in January of the year 1271, a
group of ambassadors arrived in Bagan
from the court of Kublai Khan in Beijing,
with the Mongol emperor's offer.
These ambassadors asked to see the
Burmese king Narathihapate, and when they
were let into the throne room, they
demanded that the king submit to being a
vassal of the Mongols.
This ogre-like king refused.
The Glass Palace Chronicle remembers
this encounter in dramatic terms, and
uses the Burmese name Taruk or Turk to
describe the Mongol ambassador.
The Taruk sent 10 ministers and a
thousand horsemen to demand golden
ricepots, vessels of gold and silver, gold and
silver ladles, because, said he, they were
once offered by King Anawrahta.
Furthermore, some chronicles say that
they came demanding a white elephant.
The Taruk ambassadors in making demands
showed no due respect nor reverence in
the king's presence.
Therefore, the king commanded,
slay these 10 ministers and thousand
horsemen. Let none escape.
Both Burmese and Mongol inscriptions of
the time indicate that this sentence was
not actually carried out, with the king's
advisors perhaps pleading with him to be
rational. But it shows the extent to
which the Mongol demands angered this
King Narathihapate.
Back in Beijing, we can only imagine the
scenes as Kublai Khan was informed of
this insult.
But he was still reluctant to order an
invasion. He was battling the last
remnants of the Song Dynasty in the
south, and he had just attempted an
ill-fated sea invasion of Japan,
capturing the island of Tsushima, and
attempting to land on the Japanese
mainland. But his ships had been
destroyed in a pair of typhoons that the
Japanese would later name the Divine
Winds or Kamikaze, and ten thousand
Mongol soldiers had been lost.
After this embarrassment, Kublai Khan had
no great desire to commit a large number
of troops to a small border dispute with
Bagan.
Instead he ordered his armies to move
into a wide swathe of contested
borderlands in the forbidding mountain
ranges between his empire and Burma.
In response, the king of Bagan refused to
back down, and sent his own armies to
recapture the region, backed by a large
force of war elephants.
This Burmese army marched up into the
thickly forested hills.
We can only imagine how the soldiers
felt marching to war with this unknown
enemy, of which they must have heard
terrifying tales.
One Burmese poet writing later would
give a description of an army marching
to battle.
We are not afraid of anything. We are
daring and brave, ready to sacrifice our
lives, marching to the Royal City. On this
day, fixed as the Day of Victory, at our
camp in the forest verdant, are the
branches full of small flower buds. Sweet
are the sounds of the military drums and
gongs in the soft evening twilight. Just
as mists and clouds are dispersed, so too
must we destroy our enemy.
This army finally met the Mongol
garrison at a rocky forested gully
known as the Vochang Valley.
The explorer and adventurer Marco Polo
by this time was serving as a diplomat
in the court of Kublai Khan. He recalls
the force that the king of Bagan sent.
So, this king prepared a great force and
munitions of war and he had, let me tell
you, two thousand great elephants, on each
of which was set a tower of timber, well
framed and strong, and carrying from 12
to 16 well-armed fighting men.
Besides these, he had of horsemen and
of footmen good 60,000 men. In short, he
equipped a fine force as well befitted
such a powerful prince. It was indeed a
host capable of doing great things,
and what shall I tell you when the king
had completed these great preparations
to fight the Tartars, he tarried not. They
arrived within three days of the great
Khan's host, which was then at Vochan, in
the territory of Zardandan.
It's likely that for many of the Mongol
soldiers, this was their first experience
of seeing war elephants fielded in
combat. These enormous creatures would
have advanced in a terrifying wall, with
their wooden superstructures carrying
archers. Marco Polo describes what
happened next.
When the king's army had arrived in the
plain and was within a mile of the enemy,
he caused all the castles that were on
the elephants to be ordered for battle,
and the fighting men to take up their
posts on them, and he arrayed his horse
and his foot. The horses of the Tartars
took such fright at the sight of the
elephants that they could not be got to
face the foe, but always swerved and
turned back, whilst all the time the king
and his forces and all his elephants
continued to advance upon them.
But the Mongols had learned their
tactics on the vast open steppes of
Central Asia, and they knew that when an
enemy was too strong to face directly,
you could always retreat and pepper them
with arrows from a distance, and that's
exactly what they did.
When the Tartars perceived how the case
stood, they were in great wrath and knew
not what to say or do, but their captain
acted like a wise leader who had
considered everything beforehand. They
did as he bade them, and plied their
bow stoutly, shooting so many shafts at
the advancing elephants that in a short
space they had wounded or slain the
greater part of them, as well as of the
men they carried. When the elephants felt
the smart of those arrows that pelted
them like rain, they turned tail and fled,
and nothing on Earth would have induced
them to turn and face the Tartars.
Then, too, they plunged into the wood and
rushed this way and that, dashing their
castles against the trees, bursting their
harness, and smashing and destroying
everything that was on them.
With the enemy in disarray, the Mongol
cavalry charged down on them and the
forces of Bagan were scattered.
The Mongol chronicles can barely conceal
their pride at the size of this victory.
They record that only 700 Mongol
soldiers were able to defeat a Burmese
army of 50,000 while only losing a
single soldier, but this is clearly an
exaggeration. The Burmese chronicles,
perhaps understandably, make no mention
of this disastrous campaign.
The main force of Bagan had been utterly
defeated on what should have been their
home turf, and there was now little
standing between the Mongol armies and
the rich river valley of the Irrawaddy.
The Mongols were quick to capitalize on
their victory.
Kaungsin, the next fort along the road,
fell just six days later, on the 9th of
December 1283, and now the Mongol forces
pushed on into the Irrawaddy valley.
It's clear from the exaggerated tones of
the Burmese Chronicles just how much of
a threat this Mongol invasion force was.
The Turk mustered all the parts of his army
to the number of 6 million horsemen
and 20 million footmen,
and they came marching.
The situation clearly looked bleak. King
Narathihapate ordered two of his generals to take
his remaining forces and fortify the town of
Ngahsaunggyan on the crucial river
crossing of the Irrawaddy.
Coming to Ngahsaunggyan town, they made
it strong and girded it with forts and
moats and ditches, and fought in their
defense at the river crossing of Bhamo.
For three full months they slew the
enemy and spared not even the feeders of
elephants and horses, but slew them all.
But when 10 myriad men were dead, the
Taruk sent 20 myriad. When 20 myriad
were dead, he sent 40 myriad. The king's
men were weary and fore-done, and as soon
as the Taruks crossed the river,
Ngahsaunggyan fell.
At the news of the fall of Ngahsaunggyan,
the ogre-like king's courage failed him.
He fled the city of Bagan and headed to
the south.
Then the king called his ministers and
consulted with them, saying Bagan town is
now too narrow for us, in depth too
shallow.
It cannot contain the hosts of fighting
men, the hosts of elephants and horses.
Let us go straight away to the south and
establish a strong town.
For this reason, King Narathihapate
would go down in history in Burma by the
name Taruk-Pye Min, or the king who fled
from the Turks.
He retreated into the south of Burma and
left the rest of the country leaderless
and in chaos.
With no remaining confidence in the king
of Bagan to protect them, many of the
empire's provinces simply broke away and
looked to their own defenses.
For the next year, the king attempted to
negotiate with the Mongol invaders, and
throughout this time, the lowlands of
Burma were a battlefield convulsed in a
series of constant running skirmishes.
It's not actually certain whether or not
the Mongol forces reached the capital
city of Bagan.
According to Burmese sources, the
generals that the king had sent to
defend the north seemed to have been
able to slow the Mongol advance and even
repel them about 160 kilometers north of
the capital.
Some sources claim quite plausibly that
the Mongol soldiers struggled in the
baking heat of Myanmar's Dry Zone and
suffered from diseases like malaria,
which sapped the momentum out of their
campaign.
Archeology seems to support this story,
since on the temples and structures of
Bagan, there's little evidence of war
damage or burning.
Marco Polo, in the court of Kublai Khan,
claims that the Mongols did reach Bagan,
but explains that they left the temples
intact out of some mixture of respect
and superstition.
They marched until they came to the
country and province of Mien, and they
did conquer the whole of it, and when
they found in the city the two towers of
gold and silver, they were greatly
astonished and sent word thereof to the
great Khan, asking what he would have
them do with the two towers,
seeing what a great quantity of wealth
there was upon them.
The great Khan, being well aware that
the king had caused these towers to be
made for the good of his soul and to
preserve his memory after his death, said
that he would not have them injured but
would have them left precisely as they
were, and that was no wonder either, for
ye must know that no Tartar in the world
will ever, if he can help it, lay hand on
anything appertaining to the dead.
Whatever the situation, the Mongols had
no interest in a drawn-out conflict.
By the year 1287, the Mongol Khan had
agreed to a tentative peace.
The Burmese delegation formally
acknowledged Mongol power over their
kingdom and agreed to pay an annual
tribute that was a certain proportion
of the annual agricultural output of the
country.
But the agreement broke down only a
month later.
In late June, the defeated and humiliated
King Narathihapate was returning from
the south, traveling north up the river
on his royal barge to take up his
position as a puppet king in the capital
he had fled years before. But on
the 1st of July, 1287, King Narathihapate
was intercepted en route by his
second son Thihathu, who had him
assassinated.
They went upstream in route and disarray
without union or order,
and when they reached the port of
Promay, Thihathu stopped the royal raft
and put poison in the food.
He offered it and said O King, eat,
but the king knew that there was poison
in the food and he would not eat. When
Thihathu heard he had caused three
thousand soldiers to go and stand around
the royal raft with gleaming swords
unsheathed within their hands,
then he took the ring off his finger and
he let four drops of water over it, and
gave it to his queen.
And he made a solemn vow and said,
‘In all the lives we're in, I wander
throughout Samsara until I reach
nirvana. May I never have a son born to
me again,’ and he took the food and ate,
and even as he ate, he died.
The death of this king was the final
death blow for the disintegrating
kingdom of Bagan.
All remaining provinces that had once
been loyal to it now broke away.
There was no king at all for the next
two years, and when one of Narathihapate’s
sons, named Kyawswa, did emerge as ruler, he
would reign over only the diminished and
impoverished city of Bagan itself, and he
had virtually no army.
He would be assassinated along with his
son and heir on the 10th of May, 1299.
It was during this time that the
explorer Marco Polo visited the city of
Bagan and saw with his own eyes the
glorious sights of its temples now
diminished by the years of war.
Throughout this whole period, the Mongols
could have easily moved in to occupy the
territory of Bagan, but it seems they had
no interest in doing so. In fact, they
would send no more expeditions to
restore order.
Their policy seems to have been to allow
the fragmentation of the kingdom to
continue, and to watch from afar as the
once great power that had challenged
them simply tore itself apart and sank
into irrelevance.
One 14th century king named Mingyi
Swasawke wrote a later inscription with
a brief sad note about this time.
The Burmese Empire disintegrated because
of internal strife.
The collapse of the empire of
Bagan was now complete.
The area of the city of Bagan would
remain occupied for much of the century
that followed, and people would continue
to farm and keep animals in the lands
around the great temples and stupas as
they slowly crumbled beneath the forces
of the elements.
Other kingdoms would occupy this region
over time, some kings even crowning
themselves at Bagan and giving
themselves the titles of the old
emperors, but the city would never again
hold the same prominence.
A smaller number of new and impressive
religious monuments still went up to the
mid 15th century,
but after that, new temple constructions
slowed to a trickle and then stopped
entirely,
and bit by bit, the city fell into ruin.
The area of the city of Bagan remained a
pilgrimage site up until the modern day.
While farmers grazed their cattle on the
grasses pushing up through the bricks,
pilgrims traveled for hundreds of miles
to visit its unique landscape and see
the awe-inspiring sight of its golden
domes and spires rising out of the
morning mist of the flat river valley.
Some of the larger and more impressive
temples would even be maintained and
repaired for centuries to come, but
thousands of the less famous and more
out of the way temples fell into
disrepair and ruin, some disappearing
entirely, crumbling into ruined mounds,
swallowed up by the forests.
The English writer William Somerset
Maugham who traveled through Burma and
Thailand in 1923, wrote a memoir of his
travels entitled A Gentleman in the
Parlor.
In it he writes about how he was
affected by the sight of the ruins of
cities like Angkor,
Ayuthaya, and Bagan.
In these Eastern countries, cities are
founded, increased to greatness, and are
destroyed in a manner that cannot but
fill the Western traveler, accustomed for
many centuries now to a relative
stability, with a certain misgiving.
Here and there in the jungle, far from
any habitation, you will find ruined
temples overgrown with trees, and among
the dank verger, broken gods, and
elaborate bass reliefs as the only sign
that here was once a thriving city, and
you will come across poverty-stricken
villages that are all that remain of the
capital of a rich and powerful kingdom.
It is a somber reminding of the
mutability of human things.
For Maugham, the sight of these ruins
reminded him that the empire he lived at
the heart of might also one day be
consigned to history.
Maugham writes evocatively of his first
visit to the ruined temples of Bagan, as
he approached by steamboat along the
great river Irrawaddy.
A light rain was falling and the sky was
dark with heavy clouds when I reached
Bagan. In the distance I saw the pagodas
for which it is renowned. They loomed
huge, remote, and mysterious out of the
mist of the early morning like the vague
recollections of a fantastic dream. I do
not know how many pagodas there are at
Bagan. When you stand on an eminence, they
surround you for as far as the eye can
reach. They are almost as thickly strewn
as the tombstones in a cemetery. They are
of all sizes and in all states of
preservation. Their solidity and size and
magnificence are the more striking by
reason of their surroundings, for they
alone remain to show that here a vast
and populous city once flourished. Today
there is only a straggling village with
broad untidy roads lined with great
trees, a pleasant enough little place.
Over the next few days, Maugham would explore
the crumbling ruins of these temples and
pagodas and walk among the dilapidated
buildings,
and everywhere he found the place
infused with a strange and lingering
melancholy.
Within the pagodas, images of the Buddha
sit in meditation.
The goldleaf has long since worn away
from the colossal figures, and the
figures are crumbling to dust.
The fantastic lions that guard the
entranceways are rotting on their
pedestals, a strange and melancholy spot.
Grass grows in the chinks of the
pavement, and young trees have taken root
in the crannies.
They are the refuge of birds.
Hawks wheel about their summits and
little green parrots chatter in the
eaves.
The birds were singing noisily in the
trees. The crickets chirped and the frogs
croaked, croaked, croaked.
Somewhere, a boy was whistling a
melancholy tune.
I'd like to end the episode with a
reading from one of the great poets of
the Bagan period, a man named
Anantasuriya.
Anantasuriya was a scholar who served as
the chief minister in the kingdom of
Bagan under King Naratheinka, who ruled in
the latter half of the 12th century.
As a result of a palace coup, the king's
brother seized the throne and began
purging the government of those loyal to
the previous king. Because of this,
Anantasuriya was ordered to be executed,
and just like Marco Polo sitting in his
jail cell in Genoa a century later on
the other side of the world, Anantasuriya
turned in his time of imprisonment to
writing.
While he sat in prison awaiting his
death, he wrote the following poem, which
has gone down in history as one of the
most beautiful pieces of writing
produced during the efflorescence of art
and culture that took place during the
empire of Bagan.
It's a poem of loss and forgiveness,
about ultimately accepting the fate of
all things to pass into darkness and
dust.
As you listen, imagine what it would feel
like to walk the emptying streets of the
city of Bagan as its temples crumbled
and grasses grew up through its streets
and homes. Imagine watching trees push
through the bricks of the temple stupas
and shaded doorways, animals running wild
in the streets while the sun set in a
red haze over the hills and and the
poets sang of the end of days.
Often when one man prospers, another must
suffer destruction. Such is the nature of
things.
A courtier's satisfaction in enjoying
kingly confidences in golden palaces and
a king's own good fortune are merely
bubbles on the surface of a vast ocean,
momentary and evanescent.
If dictated by mercy and pity I were to
be released and freed from execution,
still I would not escape death.
Inseparable am I from karma.
It is the nature of every living thing
to decay.
Should I again meet my lord the king in
one of my future rebirths in the cycle
of Samsara, begrudging him nothing, all I
would do is to lovingly forgive him, for
impermanent is my body of blood. Danger
and death are constant foes,
and in this world must ever be.
Thank you once again for listening to
The Fall of Civilizations Podcast. I'd
like to thank my voice actors for this
episode, Jay Forrester, Michael
Hajiantonis,
Alexandra Boulton, and Paul Casselle.
Readings in Burmese were performed by
Daniel San. Thank
you also to my researcher, Brian Stolk.
I love to hear your thoughts and
responses on Twitter, so please come and
tell me what you thought. You can follow
me @PaulMMCooper.
If you'd like updates about the podcast,
announcements about new episodes, as well
as images, maps, and reading suggestions,
you can follow the podcast @Fall_of_
Civ_Pod, with underscores separating the
words.
This podcast can only keep going with
the support of our generous subscribers
on Patreon. You keep me running, you help
me cover my costs, and you also let me
dedicate more time to researching,
writing, recording, and editing to get the
episodes out to you faster and bring as
much life and detail to them as possible.
I want to thank all my subscribers for
making this happen.
If you enjoyed this episode, please
consider heading onto patreon.com
forward slash fall of civilizations
underscore podcast, or just Google Fall
of Civilizations Patreon.
For now, goodbye, and thanks for listening.